Supreme Allied Commander Dwight D. Eisenhower
faces a monumental decision
whether or not to launch the D-Day invasion of France
the largest and most complex
military invasion in human history.
The invasion had been delayed for 24 hours
because of an unpredictable summer storm.
The mood is tense
everyone waits for the meteorologist’s report
he states that there is a small window of opportunity.
The weather will remain poor, but we could risk the invasion.
Eisenhower peppers his commanders with questions
going over every last detail.
His Naval Commander worries
about the condition of the seas and the high winds.
Rough seas could sink the landing craft
and drown the soldiers and sailors manning them.
The invasion could become a disaster.
His Air Chief fears that bad visibility
from low cloud cover would lead his paratroopers
to be dropped over too vast an area
and then be annihilated by the Nazi forces.
But Eisenhower knows
that if he delays, secrecy will be difficult
if not impossible, to maintain.
And if the Germans learn where
the invasion forces are landing
there will be almost no chance of success.
150,000 troops
American, British, and Canadian, are massed along
the English coast awaiting Eisenhower’s orders.
There is complete silence in the room
for several minutes as he contemplates the decision
knowing that thousands or perhaps tens of thousands
of Allied soldiers will likely have to die to overcome the enemy defenses
but it has to be done.
The fate of freedom in the world hangs in the balance.
“Okay, we’ll go,” he says.
They can’t afford to wait.
Now there is no turning back.
That evening, Eisenhower makes a surprise visit to the paratroopers
of the U.S. 101st Airborne division shortly before they board their planes.
He walks from group to group
wishing them good luck and asking them
where they’re from, searching for someone
from his hometown of Abilene, Kansas.
He never finds one that night.
Before the invasion,
Eisenhower had written a short message
the Order of the Day, for the invasion troops.
A copy of the message was
provided to each soldier to take with him.
Soldiers, sailors, and airmen
of the Allied Expeditionary Force!
You are about to embark
upon the Great Crusade
towards which we have striven these many months.
The eyes of the world are upon you.
The hopes and prayers
of liberty-loving people everywhere
march with you.
In company with our brave allies
and brothers in arms on other fronts
you will bring about the destruction
of the German war machine
the elimination of Nazi tyranny
over the oppressed peoples of Europe
and security for ourselves in a free world.
Your task will not be an easy one.
Your enemy is well trained
well equipped and battle-hardened.
He will fight savagely.
The tide has turned!
The free men of the world
are marching together to victory!
I have full confidence in your courage
devotion to duty and skill in battle.
We will accept nothing less than full victory!
Good luck!
And let us all beseech the blessing
of Almighty God
upon this great and noble undertaking.
Eisenhower nervously receives reports.
Airborne casualties are far fewer
than had been feared.
British forces invading Sword and Gold beaches
Canadian forces at Juno Beach
and American forces at Utah Beach
all capture their beaches.
Worrisome news arrives from Omaha Beach.
After six hours of fighting, the American forces there
only cling to a few yards of the beach
tied down by a barrage of artillery
mortar, and machine-gun fire.
Eventually, incredible acts of heroism
by American soldiers and sailors
overcome the Nazi defenses.
Despite the loss of thousands of Allied troops
the invasion is an astonishing success.
The Allies have won the battle of D-Day
and can now move men and equipment
onto the continent.
From the Normandy beaches
the Allies would fight their way across Europe
eventually crushing the Nazi armies
and meeting up with Soviet forces
advancing from the East less than a year later
The most destructive war
in the history of mankind
was mercifully brought to an end
through the courage and selflessness of the forces
East and West
determined to end the Nazi German regime.